Create kriged apportioned abundance documentation (#216)
OSOceanAcoustics/echopop: docs/theory/apportion_abundance.md

(apportion-abundance)=
# Apportioning kriged abundance

{{<b>Perhaps a link to the [biomass apportionment page](../theory/apportion_biomass.md) or additional (brief) references/re-explanations here?</b>}}

> Summed biomass estimates along $\ell$ and $\alpha$ for each $s$ along transect interval $k$ for aged ($B_{s, \ell, \alpha}^{k,\textrm{aged}}$) and unaged ($B_{s, \ell}^{k,\textrm{unaged}}$) kriged biomass estimates are summed together ($\hat{B}_{s}^{k}$) by first summing $B_{s, \ell, \alpha}^{k,\textrm{aged}}$ across $\alpha$ for each $\ell$ and then adding that quantity with $B_{s, \ell}^{k,\textrm{unaged}}$. The result is then summed across all $\ell$ to yield $\hat{B}_{s}^{k}$. This is done in tandem with the unsexed aged ($B_{\ell, \alpha}^{k,\textrm{aged}}$) and unaged ($B_{\ell}^{k,\textrm{unaged}}$) kriged biomass estimates to yield the total biomass ($\hat{B}^{k}$). This not calculated via adding male ($\hat{B}_{M}^{k}$) and female ($\hat{B}_{F}^{k}$) since $\hat{B}^{k}$ is inclusive of male, female, <i>and</i> unsexed fish.

Reviewer: I wonder if the part about 
> This is done in tandem with the unsexed aged ($B_{\ell, \alpha}^{k,\textrm{aged}}$) and unaged ($B_{\ell}^{k,\textrm{unaged}}$) kriged biomass estimates
Should be 
> This is done in tandem with the unsexed aged ($B_{\textrm{unsexed}, \ell, \alpha}^{k,\textrm{aged}}$) and unaged ($B_{\textrm{unsexed}\ell}^{k,\textrm{unaged}}$) kriged biomass estimates

Since in all expression so far when we omit subscript index it means it is summed over all partition of that index (e.g., omitting $\alpha$ means summing over all ages)

Author: Ah, since you've pointed that out, I actually think my original language was too ambiguous. By "unsexed aged ($B_{\ell, \alpha}^{k, \textrm{ aged }}$) [...]", I actually meant to refer to this as the _total_ biomass which is inclusive of male, female, and unsexed fish. There is a different section of the original Matlab code (albeit for the transect analysis and not the kriging) where the unsexed biomass is intentionally reported separately from sexed (or male/female). Similar to other aspects we've discussed for the kriging apportionment, I don't see why that couldn't be extended here. Putting that aside, I think $B_{\textrm{ unsexed}, \ell, \alpha}^{k, \textrm{ aged } }$ could create some confusion with biomass estimates for specifically unsexed fish I think, something like $B_{\textrm{all}, \ell, \alpha}^{k, \textrm{aged}}$ would be better? Or maybe  $B_{\textrm{total}, \ell, \alpha}^{k, \textrm{aged}}$ since we use $\textrm{all}$ to denote both aged and unaged?

![ image ](../images/initial_biomass_summation.jpg)

> These biomass estimates are then converted to sexed ($\hat{N}_{s}^k$) and total ($\hat{N}^k$) abundance by using averaged length-weight regression output ($\overline{W}^i(\ell)$) for stratum $i$. Consequently, $\overline{W}^i(\ell)$ can be defined either by using the average length-weight relationship produced from each $i$ or parameterizing $\overline{W}^i(\ell)$ with the mean length ($\bar{\ell}^i$) within each $i$. It is important to note, however, that both $\hat{N}_{s}^k$ and $\hat{N}^k$ are calculated using $\overline{W}^i(\ell)$ fit from <b>all</b> individuals (i.e. male, female, and unsexed).

Reviewer: For the last sentence:
> It is important to note, however, that both $\hat{N}_{s}^k$ and $\hat{N}^k$ are calculated using $\overline{W}^i(\ell)$ fit from <b>all</b> individuals (i.e. male, female, and unsexed).

I wonder if this is an unintended error...?

Author: It certainly is possible that this is an unintended bug in the code. Perhaps using the general relationship from all fish/samples may be more statistically 'robust' for strata where few individuals from a particular sex (aged or unaged) may be available. I can also take a second look through this section of the code within the loop to see if there are any more context clues (e.g. comments that say 1 thing, but the code says a different thing).

![ image ](../images/biomass_to_abundance_conversion.jpg)

{{<b> This is in the Matlab code along this same step, but I'm not sure whether it is appropriate to include here -- it is worth noting that the kriging apportionment algorithm <i>can</i> can be applied toward kriged <i>NASC</i> -- so perhaps this would be better there with a cross-reference to this page? </b>}}

> Abundance is then converted to <i>NASC</i> ($\hat{\textit{NASC}}^k$) by multiplying $\hat{N}^k$ by the $i$<sup>th</sup> averaged linear backscattering cross-section ($\bar{\sigma}_{\textrm{bs}}^i$):

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The animal abundance in transect interval $k$ is then converted to $NASC$ by multiplying $\hat{N}^k$ by the averaged differential backscattering cross-section of stratum $i$ ($\bar{\sigma}_{\textrm{bs}}^i$):
```

![ image ](../images/abundance_to_nasc_conversion.jpg)

{{<b> Here, "N" is being used for abundance; however, this can create confusion with "counts" which represent something different. In the equations below, I use "N" to comport with what was used for `apportion_biomass`, but maybe it would be better to use "n" instead to represent sample numbers/counts? </b>}}

### Unaged fish samples

> The relative number proportion ($r_{N}$) for unaged fish for each $s$ ($r_{N,s}^{i, \textrm{unaged/all}}$) represents fraction of each unaged fish $s$ ($N_s^{i, \textrm{unaged}}$) relative to the total counts of both unaged ($N^{i, \textrm{unaged}}$) and aged ($N^{i, \textrm{aged}}$) within each $i$: 

Reviewer: Do you mean for $k$ instead of $i$ here? Or do you actually mean for stratum $i$?

Reviewer: Also not sure where the unaged ($N^{i, \textrm{unaged}}$) and aged ($N^{i, \textrm{aged}}$) number proportion came from?

![ image ](../images/unaged_all_sex_number_proportion.jpg)

> Similarly, the number proportions of unaged specimens for each $s$ distributed across $\ell$ ($r_{N,s,\ell}^{i, \textrm{unaged/unaged}}$) represents the fraction of unaged fish counts within each $\ell$ relative to the total unaged sample count ($N_s^{i, \textrm{ unaged } }$) for each $s$ within each $i$:

Reviewer: I think there's some error here. Easier to talk through, I'll come find you.

![ image ](../images/aged_all_sex_number_proportion.jpg)

Similarly, the number proportions of aged specimens for each $s$ distributed across $\ell$ and $\alpha$ ($r_{N,s,\ell, \alpha}^{i, \textrm{aged/aged}}$) represents the fraction of aged fish counts within each $\ell$ relative to $N_s^{i, \textrm{ aged } }$ for each $s$ within each $i$:

![ image ](../images/aged_aged_sex_length_age_number_proportion.jpg)

The total aged abundance for each $s$ ($\hat{N}_s^{k,\textrm{aged}}$) is:

![ image ](../images/aged_abundance_apportionment.jpg)

### Combining aged and unaged fish abundances

The total abundance ($\hat{N}_{s, \ell, \alpha}^{\textrm{all}}$) from both aged and unaged samples distributed across $\ell$ and $\alpha$ for each $s$ is:

{{ <b> This equation is incorrect and requires tweaking. In the code, what ends up happening is: 
1. A matrix of shape $N_{\ell}$ rows by $N_{\alpha}$ + 1 columns is generated to store both the aged and unaged samples
2. Apportioned unaged $\ell$ abundance is cumulatively updated in that $N_{\alpha}$ + 1 column

> 3. Apportioned aged $\ell$ and $\alpha$ abundance is cumulatively updated in the preceding $N_{\alpha}$ columns

Reviewer: What is the cumulative update over? Different strata?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Apportioned unaged $\ell$ abundance is cumulatively updated in column $N_{\alpha}$ + 1
3. Apportioned aged $\ell$ and $\alpha$ abundance is cumulatively updated in the preceding $N_{\alpha}$ columns
```

Reviewer: Seems like the cumulation is over all intervals or all kriging grids?
